To complete this task, you will need to follow the steps outlined in the question. Here is an outline of what you need to do:
Set a value for y and evaluate x = ye^y.
Solve the Lambert equation, ye^y = x, for y using Newton's method and Halley's method. For both methods, you will need to use an absolute tolerance of tol = 10^-5.
Calculate the absolute error between the exact value of y and the computed solutions using Newton's method and Halley's method.
Fill out Table 1 and Table 2 with the results of the calculations, comparing the efficiency of the two methods for both branches.
Plot the two branches (W0 in blue and W-1 in red) on the same graph, adding a black marker at the point (x = -1/e, y = -1). Explain why this is the point where the two branches meet each other.
To begin, you will need to set a value for y and evaluate x = ye^y. Once you have done this, you can proceed with the rest of the steps.
Newton's method and Halley's method are iterative methods used to find the roots of equations. Newton's method uses an initial guess for the root and then iteratively improves the guess using the equation f(x) = 0. Halley's method is a variant of Newton's method that uses both the function f(x) and its derivative f'(x) to improve the guess for the root.

Both methods require an initial guess for the root and a tolerance level (in this case, tol = 10^-5). The methods will continue iterating until the difference between the current guess and the previous guess is less than the tolerance level.
To fill out Table 1 and Table 2, you will need to record the number of iterations and the absolute error for each method (Newton's and Halley's) for both branches (W0 and W-1). You can then compare the efficiency of the two methods by looking at the number of iterations and the absolute error for each method.

Finally, you can plot the two branches on the same graph, adding a black marker at the point (x = -1/e, y = -1). This point is where the two branches meet because it is the only point where both W0(x) and W-1(x) are defined.
Explanationfor step 1
These is both both methods

