Can you write a report describing the cause of the accident of Windscale acccident as if I am reporting the accident and obviously dont mention like it is said in the report below that they observed some reactor stuff as they physically visited obviously I didn't do that so for those kind of part just say they were taken from what report of "Report on the accident at Windscale No. 1
Pile on 10 October 1957*
William Penney1,6, Basil F J Schonland2,6, J M Kay3,6,
Jack Diamond4,6 and David E H Peirson5,7
1 Director, Atomic Weapons Research Establishment, Aldermaston, United Kingdom
2 Deputy Director, Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell, United Kingdom
3 Professor of Engineering (Nuclear), Imperial College of Science and Technology,
London, United Kingdom
4 Professor of Mechanical Engineering, Manchester University, United Kingdom
5 Authority Secretary, United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, United Kingdom
6 Member of the Committee of Inquiry
7 Secretary to the Committee of Inquiry" so write just those part with a \cite{}... I will later fill it in latex.... 
'Events leading up to the accident:
 
 The accident occurred in the course of a controlled release of stored Wigner energy
from graphite.

 The first time thatWigner energy was released in theWindscale piles occurred spontaneously
in September, 1952. As a result of a study of this accident, a procedure was instituted for
controlling releases of Wigner energy. Over the period to the end of 1956, eight such releases
were carried out on No. 1 Pile. The general procedure has been to shut down the Pile, to
arrange the appropriate instrumentation and then to cause the Pile to diverge with no coolant
air flow, thus raising the graphite and uranium temperatures. By this means, the graphite is
brought up to a temperature at which Wigner release is started. This has not always
succeeded in annealing all the graphite in the Pile, e.g. in 1956 one attempt (in April) was
completely unsuccessful and two others partially successful; that is to say, energy releases
were recorded from certain regions of the Pile only, and pockets were left un-annealed.

 Originally the procedure was to carry out Wigner releases after 20,000 cumulative
megawatt days. Later this figure was increased to 30 000 megawatt days. The Windscale
Works Technical Committee, in September 1957, considered a paper (reference IGRTN/
W.586) which recommended an increase to 50 000 cumulative megawatt days in
view of the increasing difficulties of obtaining a successful release. Until more
experience had been obtained, it was decided that the next release should be at 40,000
megawatt days. A Wigner release therefore became due in October, 1957.

 A note on the loading of the pile is relevant at this stage. The Pile consists of a structure
of graphite blocks pierced by horizontal channels on an 8¼″ square lattice pitch. Each
channel contains a string of uranium fuel elements. For the purposes of charge and
discharge the channels are arranged in groups of four, access to each group being by way
of a charge hole in the front shield. In the middle of each of the groups is a channel of
smaller diameter normally used for the irradiation of isotope cartridges.

 At the material time, the Pile contained natural uranium and slightly enriched (1.28 Co)
uranium in the fuel cartridges and a considerable variety of isotope cartridges.

 There are vertical channels in the pile used for experiments connected with the civil
reactor programme. At the time of the accident, all these channels were empty except
one, which contained a small magnet under test.

 On 7th October at 01.13 the Pile was shut down and the main blowers switched off in the
preparation for the Wigner release. All necessary steps were taken to verify that the Pile
was completely shut down. The thermocouples used for the following Wigner releases
were then checked, and those which were unserviceable were replaced.*

 The shut down fans were switched off and the door in the base of the chimney and the back
inspection holes on the Pile roof were opened to minimise coolant air flow through the Pile. At
19.25 the Pile was made to diverge to generate nuclear heat for triggering off Wigner energy.

 The procedure for Wigner release is to concentrate as much flux, and therefore as much
heat as possible, in the front lower region of the Pile by suitable manipulation of the
lower coarse control rods, the upper control rods having been disconnected when fully in.

 At 19.25, the pile began to generate nuclear heat and the power level was gradually
increased so that, by about 01.00 on 8th October, 1.8MW was registering on the Pile
power meter. (We have established that when the upper horizontal control rods are
completely inserted, the ionisation chamber measuring pile power is masked. The power
meter reads low. As, however, the Pile was being controlled on temperature recordings,
the only effect was to alter the relation between the rod movements and the power
changes and hence the ‘feel’ of the controls.)

 It should be noted at this point that the operation of a Wigner release is the responsibility
of the Pile Physicist and his two deputies, by virtue of their specialised knowledge. The
Pile Control Engineers operate on the instructions of the Pile Physicists during Wigner
releases. It appears that there is nothing in the nature of a Pile Operating Manual. The
only written instruction which was produced for our inspection was a minute of 14th
November, 1955, a copy of which is at appendix C. However, the Pile Manager informed
us that there was a limit of 250 °C maximum cartridge temperature which, it had been
laid down, should not be exceeded in the first instance during a Wigner release. This
temperature was observed in two channels around midnight on 7th October; accordingly,
control rods were run in again and the Pile was shut down by 04.00.

Most of the graphite temperatures rose in the manner normal in Wigner releases.
However, according to the Physicist in charge and the Pile Manager, at about 09.00 on
8th October the general tendency was for the graphite temperatures to be dropping rather
than riseing, and it seemed probable that unless more nuclear heat was applied, the
release would stop.

 We have carefully examined the thermocouple records on this point. They do not wholly
bear out the observation reported in the previous paragraph. Undoubtedly, some of the
graphite temperatures were falling and there were some in which no Wigner release was
apparent; but a substantial number of the graphite thermocouple readings showed steady
increases. We would not therefore endorse the observation that the general tendency was
for the graphite temperatures to be dropping rather than riseing.

 However, acting on the observation which he had made, the Physicist in charge decided
to boost the release with more nuclear heating. (It should be noted that second nuclear
heating had been utilised during three previous Wigner releases. On the first two
occasions, in 1954 and 1955, it was not utilised until at least 24 hours after the last
regional burst of temperature, and after all the graphite temperatures had been seen to
be dropping. In 1956, all graphite thermocouples except one were showing a fall.)

 The bottom rods were withdrawn and the Pile made divergent at 11.05 with the object of
raising the maximum uranium temperature, which at that time was 300 °C to 350 °C. The
uranium thermocouple readings show a sharp temperature increase when the Pile
diverged for the second time. The highest uranium temperature recorded was in channel
25/27; the thermocouple reading for this channel rose by 80 °C to 380 °C in a matter of
15 minutes, with a maximum rate of rise of about 30 °C a minute. The thermocouple
reading was reduced to 334 °C within 10 minutes by adjustment of the control rods.
Nuclear heating was maintained at a lower level until 17.00, and during this period the
highest uranium thermocouple readings rose to about 345 °C. At 17.00 the nuclear
heating was terminated.

 (It should be noted that the positions of the uranium thermocouples correspond to the
readings of maximum temperature during normal operation, but that these are not the
positions of maximum uranium temperature during a Wigner release.)

 During Wednesday, 9th October, the uranium temperatures as recorded show a
maximum of 360 °C, while at 22.00 the highest value recorded was 340 °C. The graphite
temperatures showed considerable variation, but the general tendency was for the
temperatures to increase following the second nuclear heating. One graphite temperature
in particular, in channel 20/53, which had shown a reading of about 255 °C at the time
when the second nuclear heating was applied, continued to rise steadily, until by 22.00 it
had reached a temperature of 405 °C.

 The high temperature being recorded in channel 20/53 caused the Pile Physicist, at
21.00, to shut the chimney base and the inspection holes to allow the chimney draught to
induce some flow of air from the Pile and thus cool it. The effects were not considered
big enough and at 22.15 the fan dampers were opened to give a positive air flow through
the reactor. The dampers were open for 15 minutes on this occasion. They were opened
again for 10 minutes at 00.01 on 10th October, for 13 minutes at 02.15 and for
30 minutes at 05.10. This had a cooling effect on all graphite temperatures except 20/53,
where the temperature rise was merely arrested.

The records from the pile stack activity meter show no special features during the early
stages of the operation. There was an almost imperceptible increase in activity before
and during the period of the first three damper openings. At 05.40, at the end of the
fourth damper opening, there was a sharp increase of six curies. This was noted by the
Physicist who was then on duty, but no special action was taken because he regarded it
as the normal consequence of the first movement of air through the pile and up the
stack. This increase was followed by a steady drop in the curve for about two and a half
hours after which time stack activity rose steadily to a figure of 30 curies at 16.30 on
10th October.

 The outlet duct air temperature remained stationary at about 40 °C until 07.00 on 9th
October, but rose steadily thereafter. With peaks occasioned by the successive damper
openings, it had reached 85 °C by 08.00 on 10th October.

 The graphite temperature in channel 20/53 continued to rise after temporary reductions
during the periods of damper opening, until at 12.00 on 10th October a temperature of
428 °C was recorded. The dampers were again opened for 15 minutes at 12.10 and for
5 minutes at 13.40. During these openings, the second and very large increase in stack
activity, which has already been mentioned, was noted. At about the same time, a high
activity reading on the Meteorological Station roof was reported.

 These effects suggested to the operating staff the existence of one or more burst
cartridges. At 13.45, the shut down fans were switched on as a preliminary move in an
attempt either to use the scanning gear to detect any burst cartridges or alternatively to
blow the Pile cool. At 14.30, the turbo-exhauster was switched on in order to scan for the
burst slug. It was then found that the scanning gear was jammed and could not be moved.
The Pile Manager informed us that at the end of previous Wigner releases the scanning
gear could not be moved, presumably because of over-heating. On the present occasion it
was immovable despite the fact that the Maintenance Section had worked on it the
previous day (9th October) and had moved it.

 Being unable to operate the scanning gear, recourse was had to the MX 119 to sample the
air coming from the Pile for particulate activity. This showed a large positive reading.

 At this stage, the Works General Manager was informed by the Pile Manager that there
appeared to have been a bad burst, and he instructed that the affected channel should be
identified and discharged as soon as possible.

 Since the scanning gear could not be used, it was decided to remove the charge plug and
inspect the uranium channel showing the highest readings.

 Certain steps had to be taken before entry could be effected to the charge hoist. An air
count had to be taken to ensure that there would be safe working conditions and the
operatives themselves had to have a full change into protective clothing. When access
had been secured to the charge hoist, a further delay of a few minutes ensued because of
incorrect labelling of a thermocouple. The temperature of fuel channel 21/53 had been
recording very rapid increases until at 16.30 it was in the neighbourhood of 450 °C. At
this time, the plug covering this group of four channels was pulled out and the metal was
seen to be glowing; the graphite appeared to have its normal colour. No sign of
abnormality was observed in the isotope channels, but no positive conclusion can be
drawn from this because the annular gap is much less in the isotope channels than in the
uranium channels.

Cause of the accident:

 We have come to the conclusion that the primary cause of the accident was the second
nuclear heating.

 This was carried out between 11.05 and 17.00 on Tuesday, 8th October, when parts of
the pile were still rising in temperature. Having regard to the high temperatures already
existing in parts of the pile at this time, the second nuclear heating was too soon and too
rapidly applied.

 The rate of heating for a short period from 11.20 to 11.35 was particularly severe and
caused a maximum rate of rise of the observed uranium temperatures of approximately
10 °C per minute.

 The second nuclear heating led to the accident through a chain of events, and here we
must put the possible consequences in order of probability. In our opinion, by far
the most likely possibility is that the rapid rise of temperature of the fuel elements due to
the second nuclear heating caused the failure of one or more of the fuel element cans. The
exposed uranium oxidised and gave further release of heat, which, together with the
rising temperatures occasioned by later Wigner releases, initiated the fire.

 A second possibility, which we cannot entirely reject, is that a Lithium-Magnesium
cartridge failed because the second nuclear heating triggered off pockets of Wigner
energy at a time when the general level of temperatures through the pile was high. The
oxidation of the Lithium-Magnesium could have added further heat and initiated the fire.

 Once a cartridge had failed, whether it were Uranium or Lithium-Magnesium, the
burning of the graphite would make some addition to the heat being released and would
make its contribution to the development of the fire.

 We have studied and rejected the possibility that the source of the fire was an isotope
cartridge other than the Lithium-Magnesium type mentioned above. We have ascertained
that the residual heating due to radioactive decay and gamma ray absorption is
insignificant, and at most amounts to 3 °C.

 We consider that the evidence points to the initiation of the fire being the result of the
failure of the can of a fuel element giving rise to oxidation. We also consider that the
origin lay in the region of the Pile just below the middle plane and towards the front.

 The picture we have formed of this phase of the incident is as follows.

 The uranium thermocouples were installed in all cases in cartridges about 16 feet from
the front face of the Pile, where the maximum temperatures occur under normal operating
conditions. Since 1954, these thermocouples have been used to control the progress
of the nuclear heating for Wigner release.

 The uranium thermocouple readings were lower than the maximum uranium
temperatures elsewhere in the channels for two reasons. Firstly, the control rod positions
were arranged to concentrate the nuclear heating in the front lower part of the Pile and we
have examined a calculation which indicates that the peak neutron flux under these
conditions was some 3 feet nearer the front face of the Pile than under normal operating
conditions.

 Secondly, every effort was made to minimise air flow through the channels to assist the
nuclear heating in initiating the Wigner release; the position of the maximum uranium
temperature thus corresponds to the position of peak neutron flux.

 The combined effect of the distortion of neutron flux together with the transfer of the
point of maximum temperature to coincide with the point of maximum flux resulted in
the position of maximum uranium temperature occurring some seven feet nearer the front
face of the Pile than the thermocouple positions. We estimate that the maximum
temperature rise of the uranium could be 40% greater than the recorded temperature rise
during nuclear heating.

 The second nuclear heating was applied at 11.05 on 8th October, when the majority of
the graphite temperatures and all the uranium temperatures in the channels in the affected
region were rising, and when the maximum recorded uranium temperature in channel
25/57 was 300 °C. The rate at which nuclear heating was applied was unusually rapid
and led to a recorded rate of uranium temperature rise of about 10 °C/minute to a
maximum value of 380 °C at a point 16 feet from the Pile face. The normal practice in
pile operation is to limit such rises to 2 °C/minute.

 We calculated that at that point of peak neutron flux, where a graphite temperature in the
vicinity was measured as 315 °C, the uranium temperature could initially have been at
340 °C. The maximum uranium temperature after the sudden nuclear heating could thus
have been as much as 450 °C for some minutes.

 That this treatment probably led to the immediate bursting of one or more uranium
cartridges is deduced from the following.

 Some of the Mark X fuel cartridges in the affected region had received an average of 287
MWD/tonne. Evidence was given to us that under normal operating conditions in the
Windscale piles, bursts of this type of cartridge occur very infrequently at doses below
280 MWD/tonne, but that at higher dose rates bursts become increasingly frequent. With
Mark X cartridges, the incidence of bursts has been mainly in the front end of the Pile,
and many of these bursts have been caused by growth of the uranium rod causing a crack
in the shoulder at the cartridge end.

 We consider that in this way some cartridge bursts could have been produced during the
early part of the second nuclear heating by the rapid differential growth of the uranium
relative to the aluminium. The ends would have been pushed off cartridges which had
already had a dosage which brought them into the state of increasing susceptibility
to bursting.

 Under these conditions, slow oxidation of the exposed uranium metal would occur.
Laboratory tests have shown that complete oxidation of a uranium cartridge is possible
within a period of 24 hours if the cartridge is held at a temperature of 400 °C inside a
furnace. With sound undamaged cartridges the number of failures at this temperature
would be extremely small, but with burst cartridges oxidation would be inevitable at
400 °C and would accelerate rapidly at higher temperatures.

 It may be noted that the total heat of combustion of the uranium in a complete channel
comprising 17 Mark X cartridges and 4 Mark VI cartridges amounts to the very large
figure of 50 000 kilogram calories. Once the assumption is made that a single uranium
cartridge is ignited, there is no difficulty in visualising several probable routes by which
final conflagration can be reached. It is to be expected that slow combustion
continued during the period of stagnant air conditions until 22.15 on 9th October, when
the shut down air dampers were first opened to admit air to the pile.

 The rate at which air will begin to circulate through a pile on first closing the chimney
base and opening air dampers on the inlet side will inevitably be slow. This is due to the
fact that the air in the pile will be stagnant, the chimney will be cold, and there will be
little pressure difference available to draw air through the core. The first three periods
during which the dampers were opened were too short to permit any steady current of air
to be established through the pile. For this reason the fission product activity released
from the oxidising fuel elements was not carried to the top of the stack. But on the fourth
opening of the dampers (at 05.10 on Thursday, 10th October), lasting for 30 minutes, a
sufficient flow of air was established through the pile to carry a cloud of gaseous fission
products and also some particulate activity up to the filter at the top of the chimney. At
05.40, a sharp increase was recorded on the pile stack activity meter.

 During this period, the intermittent supply of air to the pile caused an accelerated rate of
oxidation of the smouldering uranium fuel elements in the affected zone. Slow
combustion of uranium continued during the morning of Thursday, 10th October with
locally rising graphite temperature. Switching on the shut-down fans at 13.45 had the
effect of rapidly increasing the rate of combustion in the affected channels. By
approximately 15.00, a serious fire was raging in the neighbourhood of the 20/53 group
of channels.

 The evidence which we obtained on the Lithium-Magnesium cartridges can be
summarised as follows.

 Of the various marks of can present, the most likely to have given trouble was the Mark
III, which has a single can holding the alloy in the form of a rod. Laboratory tests have
shown that above 427 °C, penetration of the can is possible as a result of the formation of
a eutectic alloy. At 440 °C, all cartridges tested failed within 34 hours; at 450 °C, all
failed in a few hours and some caught fire.

 There is evidence from an analysis of particulate matter caught before 15.30 on October
10th by a cyclone filter at the top of the stack that some lithium and magnesium had burnt
by then. However, no temperature as high as 400 °C was recorded in the graphite
structure until 17.00 on Wednesday, 9th, and then only momentarily and in one graphite
channel (21/48). For this reason, we consider it unlikely that the lithium-magnesium
cartridges were the immediate cause of the fire.

 For a portion of a graphite block to have been ignited at an early stage would also have
required temperatures of 450 °C. The possibility of a local large release of Wigner energy
in a pocket of graphite which had escaped previous annealing has been considered by
us in the light of both thermocouple readings, laboratory data and general information.
The available data indicate that the oxidation rate of graphite is very slow indeed at
temperatures below 400 °C, and since we can find no evidence for the likelihood of
serious ‘pocket’ releases or of temperatures in excess of 400 °C, we do not accept this as
an explanation of the accident.'

