Is the life-cycle analysis of ETS useful and/or relevant?



LCA provides a rigorous impacts of all the production process.
Helps manufacturers improve
Quality 
Quantitative

LCA studies shall include the goal and scope definition, inventory analysis, impact assessment and
interpretation of results.

LCI studies shall include definition of the goal and scope, inventory analysis and interpretation of results. The
requirements and recommendations of this International Standard, with the exception of those provisions
regarding impact assessment, also apply to life cycle inventory studies.An LCI study alone shall not be used for comparisons intended to be used in comparative assertions intended
to be disclosed to the public.

It should be recognized that there is no scientific basis for reducing LCA results to a single overall score or
number.

In defining the goal of an LCA, the following items shall be unambiguously stated:
⎯ the intended application;
⎯ the reasons for carrying out the study:
⎯ the intended audience, i.e. to whom the results of the study are intended to be communicated:
⎯ whether the results are intended to be used in comparative assertions intended to be disclosed to the
public.

In defining the scope of an LCA, the following items shall be considered and clearly described:
⎯ the product system to be studied;
⎯ the functions of the product system or, in the case of comparative studies, the systems;
⎯ the functional unit;
⎯ the system boundary;
⎯ allocation procedures;
⎯ LCIA methodology and types of impacts;
⎯ interpretation to be used;
⎯ data requirements;
⎯ assumptions;
⎯ value choices and optional elements;
⎯ limitations;
⎯ data quality requirements;
⎯ type of critical review, if any;
⎯ type and format of the report required for the study.

In some cases, the goal and scope of the study may be revised due to unforeseen limitations, constraints or
as a result of additional information. Such modifications, together with their justification, should be
documented.

Each of the unit processes should be initially described to define
⎯ where the unit process begins, in terms of the receipt of raw materials or intermediate products,
⎯ the nature of the transformations and operations that occur as part of the unit process, and
⎯ where the unit process ends, in terms of the destination of the intermediate or final products.


Several cut-off criteria are used in LCA practice to decide which inputs are to be included in the assessment,
such as mass, energy and environmental significance. Making the initial identification of inputs based on mass
contribution alone may result in important inputs being omitted from the study. Accordingly, energy and
environmental significance should also be used as cut-off criteria in this process.
a) Mass: an appropriate decision, when using mass as a criterion, would require the inclusion in the study of
all inputs that cumulatively contribute more than a defined percentage to the mass input of the product
system being modelled.
b) Energy: similarly, an appropriate decision, when using energy as a criterion, would require the inclusion
in the study of those inputs that cumulatively contribute more than a defined percentage of the product
system’s energy inputs.
c) Environmental significance: decisions on cut-off criteria should be made to include inputs that
contribute more than an additional defined amount of the estimated quantity of individual data of the
product system that are specially selected because of environmental relevance.


Supply-chain sys poorly characterized (standardisation criteria and methodology needed)
Large need for comprehensive dataset

Solar panels, recycle wind--batteries

mixed methods potential--optimisation LCA 

Entering time of prolific data and (advanced) computation techniques

Circular Economy--moving towards sustainability

trade-off --- for recycle or other choice due to health or safety

1st step in solving a problem to recognise the problem

Sustainable development goals must comply with environmental goals (integration)

pinpoint area of improvement -- informative

e.g hot water detergent changed by cold water detergent

LCA part in recycling

Mass-Energy balance---needs robust analysis

Comparability  --- ISO 1404.44 stand   (not exact result)

sensitivity

